Task-1: Environment Setup & RISC-V Reference Bring-Up
Deadline: 48 hours from task release
 Mandatory for all participants
This task ensures that every participant—regardless of FPGA board availability—starts from a common, stable baseline, exactly how engineers are onboarded in industry.
Objective
Set up the development environment and successfully run a working RISC-V reference design, followed by running the VSDFPGA labs on the same environment.
This task focuses on:
Toolchain readiness
Understanding the RISC-V execution flow
Preparing for upcoming FPGA and IP development work
This is not an FPGA programming task yet.
Step 1: Set up GitHub Codespace (Mandatory for everyone)
Participants must first set up the official Codespace environment using the reference repository below:
https://github.com/vsdip/vsd-riscv2
Instructions
Fork the vsd-riscv2 repository to your GitHub account.
Launch a GitHub Codespace from your fork.
Ensure the Codespace builds successfully and opens without errors.
This Codespace provides a known-good base environment that will be used throughout the internship.
Step 2: Verify RISC-V Reference Flow (Mandatory)
Inside the vsd-riscv2 Codespace:
Follow the README instructions in the repository.
Build and run the provided fundamental RISC-V program.
Observe successful execution (console output / logs).
Expected outcome:
RISC-V program runs successfully
No build or runtime errors
Clear confirmation that the toolchain is working
Step 3: Clone and Run VSDFPGA Labs (Mandatory)
Once the RISC-V reference flow works, clone the FPGA labs repository inside the same Codespace:
git clone https://github.com/vsdip/vsdfpga_labs.git
cd vsdfpga_labs
Follow the README instructions in vsdfpga_labs to:
Build and run the basic lab(s) that do not require FPGA hardware
Verify successful execution through simulation or logs
This step validates:
Multi-repository workflow
Readiness for IP and SoC-level tasks
Step 4: Local Machine Preparation (Strongly Encouraged)
Participants are encouraged to begin preparing their local development environment, as FPGA board work will require local execution.
Instructions
Clone both repositories locally:
vsd-riscv2
vsdfpga_labs
Refer to the following Dockerfile carefully:
 https://raw.githubusercontent.com/vsdip/vsd-riscv2/refs/heads/main/.devcontainer/Dockerfile
Important clarification
The Dockerfile is not meant to be run blindly.
It serves as a reference document listing:
Required tools
Packages
Environment setup hints
Participants should use it as guidance to install tools natively on their system (Linux preferred).
This step is about understanding what tools are needed, not completing a full FPGA setup yet.
Understanding Check (Mandatory)
Participants must submit brief answers to the following questions:
Where is the RISC-V program located in the vsd-riscv2 repository?
How is the program compiled and loaded into memory?
How does the RISC-V core access memory and memory-mapped IO?
Where would a new FPGA IP block logically integrate in this system?
Short, clear explanations are sufficient.
Optional Confidence Task
Participants may optionally:
Modify a constant or message in the RISC-V program
Rebuild and rerun
Observe and report the changed output
This is optional but recommended.
Submission Requirements
Participants must create GitHub repo and submit below information:
Screenshot or log showing successful execution of:
RISC-V reference program
VSDFPGA lab
Answers to the four understanding questions
Confirmation of environment used:
GitHub Codespace only
Codespace + local setup (partial or complete)
Important Notes
FPGA tools (yosys, nextpnr, programmers, drivers) must NOT be installed at this stage.
FPGA bring-up will be introduced in later tasks after RTL and integration confidence is built.
Board availability does not affect Task-1 completion.
Rationale (for participants)
This task reflects how real semiconductor teams work:
Environment first
Reference design validation
Understanding before modification
Hardware later, not first
Completing Task-1 successfully means you are ready for real IP and FPGA work in the upcoming weeks.
 
